# 8bitCPU
This repo is for my Digital System Design Final Project - A Simple Multi-Cycle Central Processing Unit (CPU) Design.
The project consists of 6 parts:
1. Register File
2. Control Unit / Logic
3. Arithmetic Logic Unit
4. 2 bit counter
5. 3 bit counter
6. Combination of all (main)

Here are the short explanations of each part:
1. Register file:
The register file consists of 8 register with 8 bit memory. The registers are named R0, R1, ... , R7 respecitively.
All registers have their input given inside the register file. A MUX might be placed but the register file was implemented so that it cannot make decisions.
The inputs iclude R0in, R1in, ... R7in, R0en, R1en, ... R7en, clock and reset. The registers are turned to write mode with their en enable. The inputs are in and reset is a 1 bit signal to reset all of the registers.

3. Control Unit:
The CU is the brain of the CPU. All of the operations, enable signals and control porcess are determined inside the Control Unit / Control Logic. The project has 2 main inputs named Din with 8 bit data. The first type is "Instruction". The Din is seperated as IIXXXYYY with II giving the operation type, XXX giving the X register's code and YYY giving the Y register's code. II is the OP code (operation code). The second type is an 8 bit integer for the mvi operation.
For this project, the CPU was able to do 4 operations: mv, mvi, add, sub.
mv: moves the data in the chosen register Y to the destination register X. Din code is 00XXXYYY
mvi: moves integer data taken from the RAM to the destination register X.Din code is 01XXXYYY then, 8 bit integer.
add: add the data in the destination register X and a chosen register Y and stores the result in X. Din code is 10XXXYYY
sub: subtractsa the data in the destination register X and a chosen register Y and stores the result in X. Din code is 11XXXYYY

mvi operation takes 2 inputs. The first one is the instruction mvi, X and Y registers: 01000001 means mvi: Rx <- ???. For determining the number to put, we give it as another input.
For other operations, 1 input is enough. For example, 10000001 means Rx <- Rx + Ry or add Rx and Ry and store the result in Rx.

All operation are completed in cycles with mv 0, mvi 1 and add/sub 4. We need to count the cycles using a 2 bit counter.

CU has 4 inputs OP0, OP1, and the 2 bit cycle info is taken as C0 and C1. Once an operation is compeleted, a done signal is given. The signal is generated by checking the input signals. Operation type, and other necessary signals might be found in the CU part of the project's circ file.

4. Artihmetic Logic Unit:
Our ALU implementation is able to do add and sub operations.
Both operations work using the same 8 bit adder. The adder takes the first input as the X value and the second as Y value but the Y value is manipulated. The sub operation X-Y is equavilent to X+~Y+1. The Y value is inverted with 8 XOR gates using the OP1 signal which carries the operation's info. Additionally, the Cin value is the OP1 value for the +1 operation.

5. 2 Bit Counter:
The 2 bit counter has 2 D flip-flops. The inputs are D0 = ~Q0 and D1 = Q0 XOR Q1. All inputs are connected to Done signal with AND gates to reset to 0.

6. 3 Bit Counter:
The 3 bit counter has 3 D flip-flops. The inputs are D0 = ~Q0,  D1 = Q0 XOR Q1 and D2 = . All inputs are connected to Done signal with AND gates to reset to 0.

7. Combination / Main Circuit:
The combination uses MUX - DEMUX - splitter - RAM and the other parts explained int this file. Bus signals are determined by the CU and the specified signals are sent to the corresponding MUXs and DEMUXs.
